In the late 18th century, the world's
most powerful weapons weren't tanks or
missiles. They were sailing warships.
Floating fortresses armed with dozens of
cannons, crewed by hundreds, and sent on
voyages across oceans. But how did these
massive wooden machines actually
function? To understand how they worked,
how they were built, and what life was
like inside, we spent hundreds of hours
rebuilding one ship of this era in 3D,
piece by piece, inside and out.
During the 18th century, the Royal Navy
stood as the world's dominant naval
force, operating sailing warships across
a wide spectrum of sizes and roles. At
the very top of this hierarchy were the
ships of the line.
They represented the biggest warships of
the era with the largest carrying over
100 guns on three continuous gun decks
and were crewed by hundreds of men
commonly used as flagships at the center
of major naval fleets.
At the opposite end of the spectrum were
far smaller warships such as cutters.
These vessels were usually single masted
and lightly armed, often carrying no
more than 10 guns.
Designed for speed and agility, they
were crewed by only a few dozen men and
were commonly tasked with coastal
[music] patrols. Filling the gap between
these extremes were sloops of war. These
were fast, capable warships built large
enough to operate independently over
long distances.
They were intended for patrol duties,
convoy escort, and reconnaissance
missions.
Sloops of war struck a balance between
speed, maneuverability, and firepower.
Carrying up to 18 guns and crews of more
than 100 men.
These vessels could be rigged with
either two or three masts, and three
masted versions were known as ships
loops. One of the best documented ships
loops of the 18th century is the Swan
class of the Royal Navy, which we'll
explore in detail using HMS Pegasus,
launched in 1776 as a reference.
To give you a basic idea of her size,
the ship measured 45 m in length,
roughly the same as four city buses
lined up end to end. From the keel to
the tip of the tallest mast, it stood
35.6 6 m high with a beam of 8.2 m at
its widest [music] point.
She carried a total crew of 125 men,
enough to operate the ship and manage
the complex web of sails and rigging
that kept her moving.
Above deck, the ship carried a fully
rigged sail plan with three masts, all
square rigged.
The vessel was arranged across multiple
decks from the open decks at the top
used for sailing and combat down through
the crew quarters on the lower deck and
finally to the deep storage spaces of
the hold where the gunpowder magazine
sat as the most isolated part of the
ship.
We'll walk through each of these spaces
in detail a little later, starting at
the sails and working our way downward
deck by deck. But first, let's explore
how the ship's hole was constructed. The
Swan class was designed with a
relatively narrow hole and fine lines, a
combination that gave these ships their
reputation for speed and
maneuverability.
Construction followed the frame first
method [music] standard for the period
in which the internal framing primarily
made of oak was erected first with the
external planking added afterward.
[music]
The process began with the keel laid
down as the ship's backbone. From there,
frames, the ship's ribs, were erected
along the keel, defining the whole shape
and providing its primary structural
strength. Deck beams were fitted across
the frames to support the decks above,
braced by hanging knees and vertical
pillars to distribute loads throughout
the hole. With the structure taking
shape, mast steps were set above the
keel, anchoring the bases of the three
masts and tying them directly into the
strongest part of the ship.
We also made a dedicated deep dive video
focused entirely on hull construction,
revealing details not shown in this
video, available exclusively to our
YouTube and Patreon members.
Finally, from the late 18th century
onward, many vessels of this type were
fitted with copper sheathing below the
waterline, a critical upgrade that
protected the hull from marine growth,
preserving both speed and durability
over long voyages.
Rising above the hull were the ship's
three masts, the formast forward, the
main mast midship as the tallest, and
the mizenmast aft as the smallest. Each
mast was built from stacked sections
joined by mast caps [music] with
platforms called tops mounted partway up
the mast. Each mast section was
supported by its own set of shrouds
providing lateral support and preventing
[music] side to side movement. Rad lines
horizontal ropes tied between the
[music] shrouds formed ladlike steps for
climbing.
Stays ran for and aft stabilizing the
masts lengthwise.
Each mast [music] carried horizontal
spars called yards supporting square
sails that were most effective with the
wind coming from behind.
Some yards carried extendable spars used
to carry studding sails. Extra sails set
in fair weather to increase the ship's
sail area.
At the bow, the bow sprit extended
forward with the jiboom joined to it by
a bowsprit cap. Together they carried a
jib sail and stay sails four and aft
sails that improved the ship's
efficiency by capturing wind from
different angles.
Aft the mizenmast carried a gaff a spar
supporting the spanker sail which played
a key role in steering and maneuvering.
Together, the masts, sails, and rigging
formed [music] an integrated system
refined over centuries, allowing the
ship to harness wind from multiple
directions with remarkable efficiency.
Now that we've seen the exterior, let's
head to the inside [music] where you can
see what life was really like on board.
Starting at the very front of the ship
sat the figure head, a carved wooden
decoration mounted at [music] the bow,
often tied to the ship's name or
symbolic role.
Just behind it were the seats of ease, a
simple open air toilet positioned at the
bow. These served as the primary toilets
for the crew, though in rough seas
[music] they were often unusable.
Mounted along the ship's sides [music]
were five anchors, each serving a
specific purpose.
The bower anchors were the primary
anchors. The sheet anchors were the
largest and heaviest, reserved for
emergencies or severe weather.
The kedge anchor was the smallest used
for maneuvering the ship. Rising above
the bow was the four castle, the raised
forward deck. This area served as a busy
working platform, especially during
anchoring operations and while handling
sails. Heavy bits, thick timber posts
were installed here to secure mooring
lines.
Along the edges were swivel guns, small
cannons mounted on rotating stands that
allowed a wide arc of fire. These were
used at close range for anti-personnel
defense, particularly against boarding
parties and small boats. Also on the
four castle was the Beleffrey and Bell
used for timekeeping and issuing
commands along with the galley cowl, a
vent that carried smoke and heat up from
the galley stove below. At midship was
the waste, an open section of deck
between the raised ends. At the opposite
end of the ship was the quarter deck, a
raised deck at the stern [music] that
functioned as the ship's command area.
Like the four castle, it was fitted with
additional swivel guns for close-range
defense. Dominating this space was the
capston, a powerful lifting [music]
mechanism made up of two vertically
aligned and connected wooden drums, one
on the deck and one below. rotating
around a central axis.
A rope was wrapped several turns around
either drum and long capston bars were
inserted into slots in the drum heads.
Multiple crew members would walk in a
circle, pushing the bars to rotate the
drums and generate the force needed to
raise anchors or haul heavy loads.
A paw system prevented the captain from
spinning backward under load.
Nearby stood the ship's wheel used to
steer the vessel. Turning the wheel
rotated a drum wrapped with a single
rope.
Each end of that rope ran through
pulleys and attached to either side of
the tiller, a horizontal lever connected
to the rudder.
As the wheel turned, one side of the
rope was pulled while the other was
released, moving the tiller side to side
and turning the rudder.
At [music] the stern, a large lantern
provided night identification and
signaling.
The ship's name was typically painted
here as a visual identifier.
The stern was finished with decorative
carving, including scroll work and
ornamental details characteristic of the
period. Notably, swanclass ships loops
carried more decorative detail than was
typical for vessels of their size.
And that craftsmanship is exactly what
inspired us to create a poster inspired
by this video. Grab yours through the
link in the description. Every purchase
directly supports the channel and the
team behind it. We're also giving one
away. For a chance to win one, like this
video, subscribe, and comment below.
What surprised you most about this ship.
We'll announce the winner in the next
video. And a quick shout out to our last
giveaway winner. Congratulations.
Below the four castle and quarter deck
lay the upper deck, the ship's primary
gun deck, running the full length of the
vessel.
Beneath the quarter deck at the stern
were the captain's quarters, consisting
of three cabins. The largest, known as
the great cabin, featured small windows
called lights at the stern and along the
sides. At the bow beneath the for castle
was the galley fitted with a stove where
meals were prepared and the manger, a
small enclosed space surrounded by a
raised combing designed to catch water
entering through the haw holes where
anchor cables passed through the bow. At
the center of this space was the bow
sprit step, anchoring the inner end of
the bow sprit into the hole. Lining this
deck were 16 six pounder guns. The term
six pounder refers to the weight of the
solid iron shot each gun was designed to
fire. These iron cannons were mounted on
wheeled wooden carriages and fired
through gun ports cut into the hull.
Some ports were fitted with hinged lids
to keep water out when the guns were not
in use. A typical firing sequence
followed a precise routine. After
firing, [music] the worm, a screw-like
tool on a long staff, was used to clear
debris from the barrel. A wet sponge
extinguished any remaining embers. The
powder charge was rammed down the muzzle
using a rammer, followed by the solid
iron shot. The vent hole was primed with
a quick burning charge.
Elevation was adjusted using a wooden
coin beneath the brereech, while lateral
aim was set by hauling on gun tackles on
each side of the gun. A heavy breaching
rope limited recoil, and the gun was
fired using a lintock holding a slow
burning match.
Around the midship, there were two chain
pumps used to remove billagege water
collecting in a well in the hold. Crew
members turned a long handles that
rotated a sprocket, moving a continuous
chain fitted with leather discs through
wooden tubes. One tube carried the chain
down, the other brought it up, and as
the discs moved upward, they lifted
water to a sistern from which it drained
overboard through dales. Two additional
brake pumps handled smaller amounts of
water. Gradings in the deck and in decks
below allowed light and air to pass
downward. These could also be removed to
move supplies or equipment between
levels.
Below the upper deck was the lower deck,
the ship's main accommodation level.
Positioned at the water line, it had no
side openings and relied entirely on the
gradings above for light and
ventilation.
More than 100 men lived here in
extremely confined conditions.
At the bow, this deck housed several
store rooms essential to ship
operations, including spaces assigned to
the carpenter, gunner, and bosan, along
with dedicated sail storage. These were
followed by the carpenters and bosen's
cabins. Scuttles in the deck provided
access [music] to additional storage
below. At midship was another sale store
room fitted with louvers for ventilation
along with the upper well, which
provided access to the well below.
The surrounding open space was where the
crew hung their hammocks for sleeping.
Aft were the officer's cabins with a
pantry positioned centrally and used as
a daily food service locker.
Moving into the belly of the ship was
the hold, the primary storage space. A
vessel like this could remain at sea for
months, making it essential to carry
large quantities of provisions,
supplies, and ammunition. In the aft was
the powder magazine where [music]
gunpowder was stored. It was placed deep
within the ship and isolated to reduce
fire risk, separated by layered
bulkheads and accessed through a series
of doors acting as fire brakes. The
floor was lined with lead to prevent
sparks that could ignite the gunpowder.
Adjacent to the powder magazine was the
light room, a sealed anti- room
separated by a glass window. This
allowed a lantern to illuminate the
magazine indirectly without any open
flame entering the space. Nearby was the
bread room used to store biscuits and
flour accessed through the steward's
room where provisions were distributed.
In the same area were the captain's
store room, two rooms for crew gear, and
additional storage accessed through the
floor. Midship was the largest space
within the hold, containing several tons
of stone or iron ballast used to lower
the ship's center of gravity and improve
stability.
Stacked above the ballast were rows of
wooden casks holding fresh water, salted
meat, alcohol, and other provisions
essential for the crew. In the same
area, the well collected bill water at
the lowest point of the hole before
being pumped out with the shot locker
positioned directly against it, storing
cannon shot. Forward were two storage
rooms for supplies and maintenance items
with additional storage space accessed
through scuttles in the deck above.
For centuries, the world's great navies
were built from wood and driven by wind
alone. Vast sailing warships ruled the
seas. Their power tied entirely to
canvas and weather.
That era began to change in the early
19th century with the arrival of steam
power, a technological shift that would
redefine [music] naval warfare. By the
late 1840s, more and more sailing
warships were being built or retrofitted
with screw propulsion, blending old
traditions with new machinery. Over the
decades that followed, steam engines
grew more reliable, iron armor reshaped
ship design, and sales were slowly
pushed aside. From this transition
emerged a new kind of warship, the
Ironclad, a radical break from
everything that came before. That
evolution led directly to vessels like
the USS Monitor, a ship that permanently
changed naval warfare. [music]
To see how that transformation played
out in detail, watch our full USS
Monitor video available now. Thanks for
watching. Stay curious.